The public’s understanding of artificial intelligence (AI) is largely shaped by
pop culture — by blockbuster movies like “The Terminator” and their
doomsday scenarios of machines going rogue and destroying humanity. This
kind of AI narrative is also what grabs the attention of news outlets: a Google
engineer claiming that its chatbot was sentient was among the most
discussed AI-related news in recent months, even reaching Stephen
Colbert’s millions of viewers. But the idea of superintelligent machines with
their own agency and decision-making power is not only far from reality — it
distracts us from the real risks to human lives surrounding the development
and deployment of AI systems. While the public is distracted by the specter
of nonexistent sentient machines, an army of precarized workers stands
behind the supposed accomplishments of artificial intelligence systems
today.
Many of these systems are developed by multinational corporations located
in Silicon Valley, which have been consolidating power at a scale that,
journalist Gideon Lewis-Kraus notes, is likely unprecedented in human
history. They are striving to create autonomous systems that can one day
perform all of the tasks that people can do and more, without the required
salaries, benefits or other costs associated with employing humans. While
this corporate executives’ utopia is far from reality, the march to attempt its
realization has created a global underclass, performing what anthropologist
Mary L. Gray and computational social scientist Siddharth Suri call ghost
work: the downplayed human labor driving “AI”.
Tech companies that have branded themselves “AI first” depend on heavily
surveilled gig workers like data labelers, delivery drivers and content
moderators. Startups are even hiring people to impersonate AI systems like
chatbots, due to the pressure by venture capitalists to incorporate so-called
AI into their products. In fact, London-based venture capital firm MMC
Ventures surveyed 2,830 AI startups in the EU and found that 40% of them
didn’t use AI in a meaningful way.
Far from the sophisticated, sentient machines portrayed in media and pop
culture, so-called AI systems are fueled by millions of underpaid workers
around the world, performing repetitive tasks under precarious labor
conditions. And unlike the “AI researchers” paid six-figure salaries in Silicon
Valley corporations, these exploited workers are often recruited out of
impoverished populations and paid as little as $1.46/hour after tax. Yet
despite this, labor exploitation is not central to the discourse surrounding the
ethical development and deployment of AI systems. In this article, we give
examples of the labor exploitation driving so-called AI systems and argue
that supporting transnational worker organizing efforts should be a priority in
discussions pertaining to AI ethics.
We write this as people intimately connected to AI-related work. Adrienne is
a former Amazon delivery driver and organizer who has experienced the
harms of surveillance and unrealistic quotas established by automated
systems. Milagros is a researcher who has worked closely with data workers,
especially data annotators in Syria, Bulgaria and Argentina. And Timnit is a
researcher who has faced retaliation for uncovering and communicating the
harms of AI systems.
Treating Workers Like Machines
Much of what is currently described as AI is a system based on statistical
machine learning, and more specifically, deep learning via artificial neural
networks, a methodology that requires enormous amounts of data to “learn”
from. But around 15 years ago, before the proliferation of gig work, deep
learning systems were considered merely an academic curiosity, confined to
a few interested researchers.
In 2009, however, Jia Deng and his collaborators released the ImageNet
dataset, the largest labeled image dataset at the time, consisting of images
scraped from the internet and labeled through Amazon’s newly introduced
Mechanical Turk platform. Amazon Mechanical Turk, with the motto “artificial
artificial intelligence,” popularized the phenomenon of “crowd work”: large
volumes of time-consuming work broken down into smaller tasks that can
quickly be completed by millions of people around the world. With the
introduction of Mechanical Turk, intractable tasks were suddenly made
feasible; for example, hand-labeling one million images could be
automatically executed by a thousand anonymous people working in parallel,
each labeling only a thousand images. What’s more, it was at a price even a
university could afford: crowdworkers were paid per task completed, which
could amount to merely a few cents.
“So-called AI systems are fueled by millions of underpaid workers around
the world, performing repetitive tasks under precarious labor conditions.”
The ImageNet dataset was followed by the ImageNet Large Scale Visual
Recognition Challenge, where researchers used the dataset to train and test
models performing a variety of tasks like image recognition: annotating an
image with the type of object in the image, such as a tree or a cat. While
non-deep-learning-based models performed these tasks with the highest
accuracy at the time, in 2012, a deep-learning-based architecture informally
dubbed AlexNet scored higher than all other models by a wide margin. This
catapulted deep-learning-based models into the mainstream, and brought
us to today, where models requiring lots of data, labeled by low-wage gig
workers around the world, are proliferated by multinational corporations. In
addition to labeling data scraped from the internet, some jobs have gig
workers supply the data itself, requiring them to upload selfies, pictures of
friends and family or images of the objects around them.
Unlike in 2009, when the main crowdworking platform was Amazon’s
Mechanical Turk, there is currently an explosion of data labeling companies.
These companies are raising tens to hundreds of millions in venture capital
funding while the data labelers have been estimated to make an average of
$1.77 per task. Data labeling interfaces have evolved to treat crowdworkers
like machines, often prescribing them highly repetitive tasks, surveilling their
movements and punishing deviation through automated tools. Today, far
from an academic challenge, large corporations claiming to be “AI first” are
fueled by this army of underpaid gig workers, such as data laborers, content
moderators, warehouse workers and delivery drivers.
Content moderators, for example, are responsible for finding and flagging
content deemed inappropriate for a given platform. Not only are they
essential workers, without whom social media platforms would be
completely unusable, their work flagging different types of content is also
used to train automated systems aiming to flag texts and imagery containing
hate speech, fake news, violence or other types of content that violates
platforms’ policies. In spite of the crucial role that content moderators play in
both keeping online communities safe and training AI systems, they are often
paid miserable wages while working for tech giants and forced to perform
traumatic tasks while being closely surveilled.
Every murder, suicide, sexual assault or child abuse video that does not
make it onto a platform has been viewed and flagged by a content
moderator or an automated system trained by data most likely supplied by a
content moderator. Employees performing these tasks suffer from anxiety,
depression and post-traumatic stress disorder due to constant exposure to
this horrific content.
Besides experiencing a traumatic work environment with nonexistent or
insufficient mental health support, these workers are monitored and
punished if they deviate from their prescribed repetitive tasks. For instance,
Sama content moderators contracted by Meta in Kenya are monitored
through surveillance software to ensure that they make decisions about
violence in videos within 50 seconds, regardless of the length of the video or
how disturbing it is. Some content moderators fear that failure to do so could
result in termination after a few violations. “Through its prioritization of
speed and efficiency above all else,” Time Magazine reported, “this policy
might explain why videos containing hate speech and incitement to violence
have remained on Facebook’s platform in Ethiopia.”
Similar to social media platforms which would not function without content
moderators, e-commerce conglomerates like Amazon are run by armies of
warehouse workers and delivery drivers, among others. Like content
moderators, these workers both keep the platforms functional and supply
data for AI systems that Amazon may one day use to replace them: robots
that stock packages in warehouses and self-driving cars that deliver these
packages to customers. In the meantime, these workers must perform
repetitive tasks under the pressure of constant surveillance — tasks that, at
times, put their lives at risk and often result in serious musculoskeletal
injuries.
“Data labeling interfaces have evolved to treat crowdworkers like machines,
often prescribing them highly repetitive tasks, surveilling their movements
and punishing deviation through automated tools.”
Amazon warehouse employees are tracked via cameras and their inventory
scanners, and their performance is measured against the times managers
determine every task should take, based on aggregate data from everyone
working at the same facility. Time away from their assigned tasks is tracked
and used to discipline workers.
Like warehouse workers, Amazon delivery drivers are also monitored through
automated surveillance systems: an app called Mentor tallies scores based
on so-called violations. Amazon’s unrealistic delivery time expectations push
many drivers to take risky measures to ensure that they deliver the number
of packages assigned to them for the day. For instance, the time it takes
someone to fasten and unfasten their seatbelt some 90-300 times a day is
enough to put them behind schedule on their route. Adrienne and many of
her colleagues buckled their seat belts behind their backs, so that the
surveillance systems registered that they were driving with a belt on, without
getting slowed down by actually driving with a belt on.
In 2020, Amazon drivers in the U.S. were injured at a nearly 50% higher rate
than their United Parcel Service counterparts. In 2021, Amazon drivers were
injured at a rate of 18.3 per 100 drivers, up nearly 40% from the previous
year. These conditions aren’t only dangerous for delivery drivers —
pedestrians and car passengers have been killed and injured in accidents
involving Amazon delivery drivers. Some drivers in Japan recently quit in
protest because they say Amazon’s software sent them on “impossible
routes,” leading to “unreasonable demands and long hours.” In spite of these
clear harms, however, Amazon continues to treat its workers like machines.
In addition to tracking its workers through scanners and cameras, last year,
the company required delivery drivers in the U.S. to sign a “biometric
consent” form, granting Amazon permission to use AI-powered cameras to
monitor drivers’ movements — supposedly to cut down on distracted driving
or speeding and ensure seatbelt usage. It’s only reasonable for workers to
fear that facial recognition and other biometric data could be used to perfect
worker-surveillance tools or further train AI — which could one day replace
them. The vague wording in the consent forms leaves the precise purpose
open for interpretation, and workers have suspected unwanted uses of their
data before (though Amazon denied it).
The “AI” industry runs on the backs of these low-wage workers, who are kept
in precarious positions, making it hard, in the absence of unionization, to
push back on unethical practices or demand better working conditions for
fear of losing jobs they can’t afford to lose. Companies make sure to hire
people from poor and underserved communities, such as refugees,
incarcerated people and others with few job options, often hiring them
through third party firms as contractors rather than as full time employees.
While more employers should hire from vulnerable groups like these, it is
unacceptable to do it in a predatory manner, with no protections.
“AI ethics researchers should analyze harmful AI systems as both causes
and consequences of unjust labor conditions in the industry.”
Data labeling jobs are often performed far from the Silicon Valley
headquarters of “AI first” multinational corporations — from Venezuela,
where workers label data for the image recognition systems in self-driving
vehicles, to Bulgaria, where Syrian refugees fuel facial recognition systems
with selfies labeled according to race, gender, and age categories. These
tasks are often outsourced to precarious workers in countries like India,
Kenya, the Philippines or Mexico. Workers often do not speak English but are
provided instructions in English, and face termination or banning from
crowdwork platforms if they do not fully understand the rules.
These corporations know that increased worker power would slow down
their march toward proliferating “AI” systems requiring vast amounts of data,
deployed without adequately studying and mitigating their harms. Talk of
sentient machines only distracts us from holding them accountable for the
exploitative labor practices that power the “AI” industry.
An Urgent Priority For AI Ethics
While researchers in ethical AI, AI for social good, or human-centered AI
have mostly focused on “debiasing” data and fostering transparency and
model fairness, here we argue that stopping the exploitation of labor in the AI
industry should be at the heart of such initiatives. If corporations are not
allowed to exploit labor from Kenya to the U.S., for example, they will not be
able to proliferate harmful technologies as quickly — their market
calculations would simply dissuade them from doing so.
Thus, we advocate for funding of research and public initiatives that aim to
uncover issues at the intersection of labor and AI systems. AI ethics
researchers should analyze harmful AI systems as both causes and
consequences of unjust labor conditions in the industry. Researchers and
practitioners in AI should reflect on their use of crowdworkers to advance
their own careers, while the crowdworkers remain in precarious conditions.
Instead, the AI ethics community should work on initiatives that shift power
into the hands of workers. Examples include co-creating research agendas
with workers based on their needs, supporting cross-geographical labor
organizing efforts and ensuring that research findings are easily accessed by
workers rather than confined to academic publications. The Turkopticon
platform created by Lilly Irani and M. Six Silberman, “an activist system that
allows workers to publicize and evaluate their relationships with employers,”
is a great example of this.
Journalists, artists, and scientists can help by drawing clear the connection
between labor exploitation and harmful AI products in our everyday lives,
fostering solidarity with and support for gig workers and other vulnerable
worker populations. Journalists and commentators can show the general
public why they should care about the data annotator in Syria or the
hypersurveilled Amazon delivery driver in the U.S. Shame does work in
certain circumstances and, for corporations, the public’s sentiment of
“shame on you” can sometimes equal a loss in revenue and help move the
needle toward accountability.
Supporting transnational worker organizing should be at the center of the
fight for “ethical AI.” While each workplace and geographical context has its
own idiosyncrasies, knowing how workers in other locations circumvented
similar issues can serve as inspiration for local organizing and unionizing
efforts. For example, data labelers in Argentina could learn from the recent
unionizing efforts of content moderators in Kenya, or Amazon Mechanical
Turk workers organizing in the U.S., and vice versa. Furthermore, unionized
workers in one geographic location can advocate for their more precarious
counterparts in another, as in the case of the Alphabet Workers Union, which
includes both high paid employees in Silicon Valley and outsourced low
wage contractors in more rural areas.
“This type of solidarity between highly-paid tech workers and their lower-
paid counterparts — who vastly outnumber them — is a tech CEO’s
nightmare.”
This type of solidarity between highly-paid tech workers and their lower-paid
counterparts — who vastly outnumber them — is a tech CEO’s nightmare.
While corporations often treat their low-income workers as disposable,
they’re more hesitant to lose their high-income employees who can quickly
snap up jobs with competitors. Thus, the high-paid employees are allowed a
far longer leash when organizing, unionizing, and voicing their
disappointment with company culture and policies. They can use this
increased security to advocate with their lower-paid counterparts working at
warehouses, delivering packages or labeling data. As a result, corporations
seem to use every tool at their disposal to isolate these groups from each
other.
Emily Cunningham and Maren Costa created the type of cross-worker
solidarity that scares tech CEOs. Both women worked as user experience
designers at Amazon’s Seattle headquarters cumulatively for 21 years. Along
with other Amazon corporate workers, they co-founded the Amazon
Employees for Climate Justice (AECJ). In 2019, over 8,700 Amazon workers
publicly signed their names to an open letter addressed to Jeff Bezos and
the company’s board of directors demanding climate leadership and
concrete steps the company needed to implement to be aligned with climate
science and protect workers. Later that year, AECJ organized the first
walkout of corporate workers in Amazon’s history. The group says over
3,000 Amazon workers walked out across the world in solidarity with a
youth-led Global Climate Strike.
Amazon responded by announcing its Climate Pledge, a commitment to
achieve net-zero carbon by 2040 — 10 years ahead of the Paris Climate
Agreement. Cunningham and Costa say they were both disciplined and
threatened with termination after the climate strike — but it wasn’t until AECJ
organized actions to foster solidarity with low-wage workers that they were
actually fired. Hours after another AECJ member sent out a calendar invite
inviting corporate workers to listen to a panel of warehouse workers
discussing the dire working conditions they were facing at the beginning of
the pandemic, Amazon fired Costa and Cunningham. The National Labor
Relations Board found their firings were illegal, and the company later settled
with both women for undisclosed amounts. This case illustrates where
executives’ fears lie: the unflinching solidarity of high-income employees
who see low-income employees as their comrades.
In this light, we urge researchers and journalists to also center low-income
workers’ contributions in running the engine of “AI” and to stop misleading
the public with narratives of fully autonomous machines with human-like
agency. These machines are built by armies of underpaid laborers around
the world. With a clear understanding of the labor exploitation behind the
current proliferation of harmful AI systems, the public can advocate for
stronger labor protections and real consequences for entities who break
them.